---
title: Six things NOT related to accessibility that will improve your disability inclusion efforts
description: Six things NOT related to accessibility that will improve your disability inclusion efforts
url: https://buttondown.com/access-ability/archive/six-things-not-related-to-accessibility-that-will/
source: https://buttondown.com/access-ability
organization: Access * Ability
repostedDate: 2025-05-19T03:59:30.631Z
tags:
  - accessibility
sourcePublishDate: 2024-10-23T14:09:35.000Z
---

Office setting with four people having a conversation, with one woman in a wheelchair with a knee brace.
What answer comes first to your mind when considering what employees with disabilities need to succeed in the workplace? Accommodations? Good health care benefits? While these factors are important, they focus directly on the disability itself. But employees with disabilities are precisely that - employees first and disabled second. Many other less obvious elements of employment will also affect these employees' happiness and performance. 
Creating an inclusive culture where everyone feels valued, providing opportunities for growth and development, access to flexible work arrangements, and ensuring psychological safety are just as essential. These factors contribute to a sense of belonging, empowerment, and the ability to thrive. They are critical ingredients for any employee's success but are especially important to employees with disabilities. Holistic approaches that consider all employee needs lead to a more productive, engaged, and fulfilled workforce. 
If you think this issue doesn’t impact your workplace, think again.  Recognize this critical statistic - 80 % of disabilities are acquired. That means that in a workplace with more than ten people, chances are that at least one employee will become temporarily or permanently disabled while working there.
Flexible Work Environment
A flexible work environment allows employees to choose when, where, and how they work. A flexible workplace recognizes that not all employees can keep traditional 9-to-5 office hours in a physical office due to various personal circumstances or disabilities. Flexible work options, such as remote work, adjustable hours, or job-sharing, help employees with disabilities participate in the workforce more effectively. Managers of employees in flexible work settings focus on whether goals are being met rather than focusing on how many hours are being put in and where. This principle supports work-life balance and enables employees to tailor their work environment to their needs.
For the executives who say, “I can’t trust that my employees will do their jobs adequately from home,” as yourself these two questions
1) if you can’t trust the employee, why did you hire them in the first place?
2) why are you measuring employee production by the number of hours they spend in the office, rather than whether goals are being achieved?
Educational Opportunities
Employees with disabilities greatly benefit from continuous education opportunities since they frequently come from non-traditional educational backgrounds. These programs provide them with the skills and knowledge to advance in their careers, stay competitive, and adapt to changes in the workplace. Continuous education fosters personal and professional growth, enabling disabled employees to enhance their capabilities, explore new roles, and overcome potential barriers related to their disabilities. Certifications in project management or accessibility can provide employees with extra credentials. Accessible learning environments that accommodate diverse students help ensure that employees with disabilities can fully participate in training programs, which increases their confidence, engagement, and sense of belonging within the organization.
Micro-coaching
Micro-coaching provides employees with targeted, timely, personalized feedback. It is called “micro” because it is short and intended to be frequent rather than waiting for monthly or quarterly 1:1s. Micro-coaching recognizes that employees benefit from ongoing support and mentorship to develop their skills and reach their full potential. Micro-coaching can be particularly valuable to employees with disabilities in helping them overcome challenges related to communication skills, work relationships, and adapting to sudden project shifts.
Psychological Safety
Psychological safety is crucial to a supportive work environment for all employees, especially those with disabilities. Psychologically safe workplaces have cultures where employees feel safe to express their thoughts, concerns, and ideas without fear of retribution or judgment. A psychologically safe work environment allows freedom to fail without punishment, which is necessary to promote innovation. For individuals with disabilities, psychological safety is vital as it encourages open communication about any accessibility needs or challenges the employee with a disability may face. It also allows allies to raise accessibility issues when the accessibility team is not in the room. Creating a psychologically safe environment promotes inclusivity, innovation, and mutual respect.
Collaboration tools
Disabled employees, especially those working from home, rely on efficient information sharing and collaboration. Employers should invest in accessible communication tools and platforms to ensure that all employees, including those with disabilities, can participate fully in team discussions, share ideas, and access critical information. This principle supports the idea that technology should be an enabler of inclusion, not a barrier.
Non-management Opportunities for Leadership
As work evolves, leadership will be less about titles and more about how an employee can influence change at any level.   Leadership should not always be about managing people.  Modern leaders drive change, share expertise, and influence positive outcomes. Non-management leadership opportunities allow disabled employees to contribute in ways that leverage their unique skills and perspectives without the challenges that may come with overseeing a team. These roles include leading projects, mentoring colleagues, or serving as subject matter experts. By providing these opportunities, organizations empower employees with disabilities to lead in ways that align with their strengths, promoting innovation, inclusion, and driving organizational success. That will create employee loyalty and lessen turnover, saving money for the organization.
 Conclusion
These seven principles of future accessible employment are essential for creating workplaces that champion diversity and prioritize inclusion. These principles underscore the importance of flexibility, continuous learning, support, and innovative leadership in creating an environment where all employees, including those with disabilities, can excel. As organizations look to the future, embracing these principles will not only improve accessibility but also create a more dynamic, adaptable workforce. By doing so, businesses are not just fulfilling legal or moral obligations. They are building the foundation for a more innovative and inclusive future.